---
title: "Building a One-Command Astro Publishing Workflow"
date: 2026-07-09
author: "cold"
---

INTRODUCTION //

Publishing a small personal site should not require memorizing a
sequence of commands every time you want to share a thought.

My site is built with Astro and deployed through GitHub Pages. The
normal process was simple: build the site, review the changes, commit
them, and push to the main branch. A simple process, sure, but why not
make it simpler?

I replaced that sequence with a small PowerShell publishing script I
call Roundtable. One command handles the whole thing now — check the
repo, make sure the remote isn't ahead, build, ask for a commit message,
push.

THE OLD ROUTINE //

Before the Roundtable script, publishing was not difficult. It was just
tedious and annoying.

I had to check the repository, make sure I was on the correct branch,
verify that the remote did not have newer work, run all of the checks,
build the site, and push everything manually.

None of those steps are complicated on their own. The problem is that
there are too many. It is easy to run them in the wrong order, forget a
step, or decide to skip a check because the change looks harmless and I
am feeling lazy.

A personal site doesn't need an elaborate deployment platform or a
custom CMS. I just wanted a safeguard that would stop me from publishing
a broken build or accidentally overwriting newer work.

WHAT IT RUNS //

The script starts by showing me exactly what changed, then runs the same
checks I would normally run by hand:

  astro check
  biome check .
  astro build

THE SAFEGUARDS //

The useful part isn't that the script saves me from typing a few
commands. It's that it refuses to continue when something looks wrong.

It checks that I am on the main branch, fetches the latest state from
GitHub, and stops if the remote branch has newer commits. If Astro or
Biome report a problem, nothing gets committed. If the commit message is
empty, it stops there too. The script never force-pushes or
automatically tries to merge newer remote changes.

That makes the workflow minimal and predictable. Either everything
passes and the site gets published, or it stops and tells me what I
fucked up.

USING ROUNDTABLE //

The script is wired into a VS Code task called Roundtable: Publish.

That means I don't even need to remember the PowerShell command or open
a separate terminal. I run the task, review the changed files, and enter
a commit message. Roundtable handles the rest.

It's still transparent enough that I can see every important step, but
simplified enough that posting no longer feels like a chore.

THE RESULT //

Roundtable did not make publishing to this site possible. It made
publishing simple and consistent.

I'll still review every change and decide what gets committed. The
difference now is that I don't have to think about the repetitive steps
or wonder if I forgot something important every time I post or make an
edit.

Not more automation — just enough to get out of my own way.
